README.MD, before:

# SCE - Simple Code Editor

SCE, pronounced C, is a lightweight, terminal-based code editor built with ncurses, designed for young C developers who want to approach CLI editors for the first time. It's designed to provide a straightforward yet powerful editing experience with syntax highlighting, file browsing, and basic IDE features.

![General Example](screenshots/Screenshot%202025-06-08%20115935.png)

## Features

- Syntax highlighting for C/C++
- File browser with directory navigation
- Variable and type definition detection and highlighting
- Automatic indentation
- Undo/redo functionality
- Search and replace
- Terminal integration
- Memory-efficient design
- Responsive UI with status bar
- Automatic window resizing
- Configuration Editor
- Git integration
- Cross-platform (Linux and macOS compatible)
- Multiple cursors
- Multiple bookmarks
- Automatic saving

## Installation

### Dependencies

- ncurses
- cmake
- pkg-config
- C compiler
- git (optional, for Git integration features)
- Homebrew for macOS

But don't worry, the build script will check and install them for you!

### Build from source
```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/valerioedu/SCE2
cd SCE2

# Build using the provided script
chmod +x build.sh
./build.sh              #or sudo ./build.sh
```

The build script will handle the installation of dependencies, compilation, and system installation.

## Usage

```bash
# Open SCE in the current directory
SCE

# Generates a new file in memory if not present in path
SCE file.c

# Open a specific file
SCE path/to/file.c

# Open a specific directory
SCE path/to/directory

# Show help
SCE -h

# Show version information
SCE -v
```

## Key Bindings

- F1: Help screen
- F2: Info page
- F3: File explorer
- F4 / Ctrl+S: Save file
- F7: Git status window
- F9: Open console
- Ctrl+F: Search within file
- Ctrl+Z: Undo
- Ctrl+R: Save current cursor
- Ctrl+B: Clear saved cursors
- Ctrl+E: Edit saved cursors/current cursor
- Ctrl+Left Arrow: Move cursor to the beginning of the previous word
- Ctrl+Right Arrow: Move cursor to the beginning of the next word
- Ctrl+Up Arrow: Move to previous cursor
- Ctrl+Down Arrow: Move to next cursor

- Alt+Right Arrow: Goes to the end of the line
- Alt+Left Arrow:  Goes to the start of the line
- Esc / Ctrl+Q: Exit editor
- Tab: Insert tab

## Multiple Cursors and Bookmarks

SCE supports working with multiple cursors:

- Ctrl+R: Save the current cursor position
- Ctrl+B: Clears all the saved cursors
- Ctrl+Up Arrow: Navigate to the nearest saved cursor position above
- Ctrl+Down Arrow: Navigate to the nearest saved cursor position below
- Ctrl+E: Switch between editing all the curors or just the current one

Multiple cursors allow you to quickly jump between different positions in your file.

## Console Commands

- term: open a shell instance
- config: configure your options
- search: equivalent to CTRL+F
- exit/quit: exits the program
- load: loads last automatic save
- goto \<Lines\> \<Cols\>: move to (Lines, Cols) position

![Goto Example](screenshots/Screenshot%202025-06-08%20114142.png)

## File Explorer

- ↑/↓: Navigate through files and directories
- Enter: Open file or enter directory
- Backspace: Go up one directory level
- Esc: Return to editor
- F1: Create new directory
- F2: Create new file
- F3: Open selected file
- H: Show help

![File Explorer Example](screenshots/Screenshot%202025-06-08%20114105.png)

## Git Integration

When working in a Git repository, SCE provides:

- Status bar information showing repository name, current branch and git user
- Git status window (F7) to view pending changes and commit history
- Automatic detection of Git repositories

![Git Example](screenshots/Screenshot%202025-06-08%20114123.png)

## Search

- Enter: Search for text
- ↑/↓: Navigate between matches
- X: Replace the current match
- Esc: Cancel search

![Search Example](screenshots/Screenshot%202025-06-08%20114201.png)

## Configuration

SCE is fully customizable through its built-in configuration editor:

- Navigate options with Up/Down arrows
- Edit values with Enter
- Save changes with F10

![Config Example](screenshots/Screenshot%202025-06-08%20114223.png)

## .sceconfig Directory:

The shell script will automatically create a .sceconfig directory in your home environment which will store your configuration file (.sceconfig), and your latest automatic save (save.sce).

### Configurable Options:

- **Tab Size**: Number of spaces for tab indentation
- **Parentheses Autocompletion**: Toggle automatic closing of parentheses
- **Quotes Autocompletion**: Toggle automatic closing of quotation marks
- **Automatic Saving**: Toggle automatic saving
- **Color Schemes**: Customize syntax highlighting colors:
  - Comments
  - Types
  - Control flow keywords
  - Variables
  - Functions
  - Numbers
  - Parentheses
  - Strings
  - Typedefs
  - Escape sequences
- **Default Path**: Set your preferred starting directory

All settings are stored in the `.sceconfig` file in your home directory.

## Memory Usage

SCE is optimized for memory efficiency, with dynamic allocation used for the undo history system to minimize memory footprint while maintaining functionality. Soon a benchmark directory will be implemented.

```bash
# Memory usage with a 700-line C file open
924211 valerio+  20   0    3104   2048   1664 S   0.0   0.0   0:00.05 SCE

# Memory usage with a 2,000-line file open
924416 valerio+  20   0    3764   2816   1792 S   0.0   0.0   0:00.11 SCE
```

With only ~2 MB of resident memory used even while editing substantial source files (~700 lines of code), SCE is suitable for resource-constrained environments while maintaining full functionality. For reference, without any plugins and without any file open: 

- Nano Virt: 4468   Res: 3328  Shr: 2176
- Vim  Virt: 17580  Res: 9344  Shr: 5760

## System Requirements

### Compatible Operating Systems
- Linux distributions (Debian, Ubuntu, Kali Linux, Fedora, Arch)
- macOS 10.13 or later

## License

SCE is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 (GPL-3.0). See the LICENSE file for details.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Feel free to submit pull requests or open issues to improve SCE. For any clarification such as more documentation, reach me out creating an issue!

Commit message:

Release v1.0.0 with new features and improvements
Prepares for the 1.0.0 release by updating versioning in CMake and version output, and documenting features in CHANGELOG.md. Adds 'goto end' command to the console for quick navigation, improves command parsing, and restricts variable detection to C files. Updates README with new command and minor code cleanups.

README.MD, after:

# SCE - Simple Code Editor

SCE, pronounced C, is a lightweight, terminal-based code editor built with ncurses, designed for young C developers who want to approach CLI editors for the first time. It's designed to provide a straightforward yet powerful editing experience with syntax highlighting, file browsing, and basic IDE features.

![General Example](screenshots/Screenshot%202025-06-08%20115935.png)

## Features

- Syntax highlighting for C/C++
- File browser with directory navigation
- Variable and type definition detection and highlighting
- Automatic indentation
- Undo/redo functionality
- Search and replace
- Terminal integration
- Memory-efficient design
- Responsive UI with status bar
- Automatic window resizing
- Configuration Editor
- Git integration
- Cross-platform (Linux and macOS compatible)
- Multiple cursors
- Multiple bookmarks
- Automatic saving

## Installation

### Dependencies

- ncurses
- cmake
- pkg-config
- C compiler
- git (optional, for Git integration features)
- Homebrew for macOS

But don't worry, the build script will check and install them for you!

### Build from source
```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/valerioedu/SCE2
cd SCE2

# Build using the provided script
chmod +x build.sh
./build.sh              #or sudo ./build.sh
```

The build script will handle the installation of dependencies, compilation, and system installation.

## Usage

```bash
# Open SCE in the current directory
SCE

# Generates a new file in memory if not present in path
SCE file.c

# Open a specific file
SCE path/to/file.c

# Open a specific directory
SCE path/to/directory

# Show help
SCE -h

# Show version information
SCE -v
```

## Key Bindings

- F1: Help screen
- F2: Info page
- F3: File explorer
- F4 / Ctrl+S: Save file
- F7: Git status window
- F9: Open console
- Ctrl+F: Search within file
- Ctrl+Z: Undo
- Ctrl+R: Save current cursor
- Ctrl+B: Clear saved cursors
- Ctrl+E: Edit saved cursors/current cursor
- Ctrl+Left Arrow: Move cursor to the beginning of the previous word
- Ctrl+Right Arrow: Move cursor to the beginning of the next word
- Ctrl+Up Arrow: Move to previous cursor
- Ctrl+Down Arrow: Move to next cursor

- Alt+Right Arrow: Goes to the end of the line
- Alt+Left Arrow:  Goes to the start of the line
- Esc / Ctrl+Q: Exit editor
- Tab: Insert tab

## Multiple Cursors and Bookmarks

SCE supports working with multiple cursors:

- Ctrl+R: Save the current cursor position
- Ctrl+B: Clears all the saved cursors
- Ctrl+Up Arrow: Navigate to the nearest saved cursor position above
- Ctrl+Down Arrow: Navigate to the nearest saved cursor position below
- Ctrl+E: Switch between editing all the curors or just the current one

Multiple cursors allow you to quickly jump between different positions in your file.

## Console Commands

- term: open a shell instance
- config: configure your options
- search: equivalent to CTRL+F
- exit/quit: exits the program
- load: loads last automatic save
- goto \<Lines\> \<Cols\>: move to (Lines, Cols) position
- goto end: move to the end of the file

![Goto Example](screenshots/Screenshot%202025-06-08%20114142.png)

## File Explorer

- ↑/↓: Navigate through files and directories
- Enter: Open file or enter directory
- Backspace: Go up one directory level
- Esc: Return to editor
- F1: Create new directory
- F2: Create new file
- F3: Open selected file
- H: Show help

![File Explorer Example](screenshots/Screenshot%202025-06-08%20114105.png)

## Git Integration

When working in a Git repository, SCE provides:

- Status bar information showing repository name, current branch and git user
- Git status window (F7) to view pending changes and commit history
- Automatic detection of Git repositories

![Git Example](screenshots/Screenshot%202025-06-08%20114123.png)

## Search

- Enter: Search for text
- ↑/↓: Navigate between matches
- X: Replace the current match
- Esc: Cancel search

![Search Example](screenshots/Screenshot%202025-06-08%20114201.png)

## Configuration

SCE is fully customizable through its built-in configuration editor:

- Navigate options with Up/Down arrows
- Edit values with Enter
- Save changes with F10

![Config Example](screenshots/Screenshot%202025-06-08%20114223.png)

## .sceconfig Directory:

The shell script will automatically create a .sceconfig directory in your home environment which will store your configuration file (.sceconfig), and your latest automatic save (save.sce).

### Configurable Options:

- **Tab Size**: Number of spaces for tab indentation
- **Parentheses Autocompletion**: Toggle automatic closing of parentheses
- **Quotes Autocompletion**: Toggle automatic closing of quotation marks
- **Automatic Saving**: Toggle automatic saving
- **Color Schemes**: Customize syntax highlighting colors:
  - Comments
  - Types
  - Control flow keywords
  - Variables
  - Functions
  - Numbers
  - Parentheses
  - Strings
  - Typedefs
  - Escape sequences
- **Default Path**: Set your preferred starting directory

All settings are stored in the `.sceconfig` file in your home directory.

## Memory Usage

SCE is optimized for memory efficiency, with dynamic allocation used for the undo history system to minimize memory footprint while maintaining functionality. Soon a benchmark directory will be implemented.

```bash
# Memory usage with a 700-line C file open
924211 valerio+  20   0    3104   2048   1664 S   0.0   0.0   0:00.05 SCE

# Memory usage with a 2,000-line file open
924416 valerio+  20   0    3764   2816   1792 S   0.0   0.0   0:00.11 SCE
```

With only ~2 MB of resident memory used even while editing substantial source files (~700 lines of code), SCE is suitable for resource-constrained environments while maintaining full functionality. For reference, without any plugins and without any file open: 

- Nano Virt: 4468   Res: 3328  Shr: 2176
- Vim  Virt: 17580  Res: 9344  Shr: 5760

## System Requirements

### Compatible Operating Systems
- Linux distributions (Debian, Ubuntu, Kali Linux, Fedora, Arch)
- macOS 10.13 or later

## License

SCE is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 (GPL-3.0). See the LICENSE file for details.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Feel free to submit pull requests or open issues to improve SCE. For any clarification such as more documentation, reach me out creating an issue!
